# Layout

The keyboard layout is based on the standard US (QWERTY) layout. Its named
`Programmer` on all systems.

# MacOS

Use `Ukelele` app to open the bundle.

# Linux

### Links

- [An Unreliable Guide to XKB Configurations](https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/doc/10.1.1.600.7058)
- [Intro XKB](linux/README-XKB.md)
- [Archwiki](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/X_keyboard_extension)

## Check the current `xkb` settings

```shell
setxkbmap -print -verbose 10
```

List all settings in X11 (not Wayland)

```shell
localectl list-x11-keymap-models
localectl list-x11-keymap-layouts
localectl list-x11-keymap-variants [layout]
localectl list-x11-keymap-options
```

## Check Key Codes (X11 and Wayland)

To see the key label corresponding to the `keycode` generated by a key use

```shell
xev -event keyboard
```

and press a key and grep inside `/usr/share/X11/xkb/keycodes` directory to find
the symbol of this key press.

## Modifier Keys

`Meta`, `Super` and `Hyper` are modifier keys that modify the key's function.
They are specific to the Symbolics Space Cadet Keyboard used on Lisp machines
back in the day. Their function is sometimes emulated using other keys.

![http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Space-cadet.jpg]

- **`Meta`**

  The Meta key is not found on modern keyboards. Its use is sometimes emulated
  with `AltGr` (on some international layouts) or the right `Alt` key on the
  others. In addition:

  - Sun keyboards have a meta key (`◆`) as well.
  - Emacs calls `Esc` the Meta key.

- **`Super`**

  The Super key is equivalent to `Win` or the `⌘` (command) key. In Ubuntu, it's
  just another name for `Win`.

- **`Hyper`**

  Hyper is the fourth (counting `Ctrl`) and last modifier on the Space cadet
  keyboard. In Ubuntu, its function is undefined (I think), but it can be
  mapped, as in the screen shot above, to `Win`, should it be needed.

Note: `xkb` has 8 modifier bits `Shift, Ctrl, Alt, Mod1, ..., Mod5` which can be
set to different modifiers.

## Creating a New Keyboard Layout

### Find Base `kbd_symbols` Layout

Navigate to `/usr/share/X11/xkb` and open `rules/evdev.xml`. Now, identify the
keyboard you want to base your layout on. You can search by the descriptions in
the GUI keyboard preferences. Within the `<layout>` tag, you'll find the base
layout under the `<configItem>` tag. Identify the two char code in the `<name>`
tag, most likely `us`.

We use here the layout `us` with a variant
`us/variantList/variant[name[text()='programmer']`.

Now, open `/usr/share/X11/xkb/symbols/us` and this is your base symbol layout.
There are other files you can edit too but you'll need to make more advanced
config changes, like `rules` and a `keymap`. In `symbols/us`, the first
`kbd_symbols` definition defines the basic symbol layout, imported by most of
the other `kbd_symbols` definitions. You'll notice that the others in this file
usually have `include "us"`, which refer to the symbol filename and the symbol
definition name. We also use this in [`us_programmer`](linux/us_programmer).

### Create a `kbd_symbols` File

Now, create a new symbols file with a new country code. I used `io`. Here's the
basic config I'm starting out with. With `include "us"`, i'm pulling in the
`us(basic)` config and then overriding that.

After you're done editing, copy your file to `/usr/share/X11/xkb/symbols/xx`.

```
partial alphanumeric_keys xkb_symbols "basic" {

    include "us"
    name[Group1]= "Digimon - US";

    // swap symbols and digits
    key <TLDE> { [     grave, asciitilde ] };
    key <AE01> { [     exclam,      1          ] };
    key <AE02> { [     at,          2  ] };
    key <AE03> { [     numbersign,  3 ] };
    key <AE04> { [     dollar,      4  ] };
    key <AE05> { [     percent,     5  ] };
    key <AE06> { [     asciicircum, 6 ] };
    key <AE07> { [     ampersand,   7 ] };
    key <AE08> { [     asterisk,    8 ] };
    key <AE09> { [     parenleft,   9 ] };
    key <AE10> { [     parenright,  0 ] };
    key <AE11> { [     minus, underscore ] };
    key <AE12> { [     equal, plus  ] };

};

```

### Swapping `CTRL` with `Caps-Lock`

Swapping Caps Lock with Left Control To swap Caps Lock with Left Control key,
add `ctrl:swapcaps` to XkbOptions. Run the following command to see similar
options along with their descriptions:

```shell
grep -E "(ctrl|caps):" /usr/share/X11/xkb/rules/base.lst
```

### Update `evdev.xml` to include the new layout

You'll need to update `evdev.xml` to include the new layout and any variants you
want included.

```xml
  </modelList>
  <layoutList>

<!-- add the new layout here -->

    <layout>
      <configItem>
        <name>io</name>

        <shortDescription>en</shortDescription>
        <description>Digimon (US)</description>
        <languageList>
          <iso639Id>eng</iso639Id>
        </languageList>
      </configItem>

      <!-- add any variant lists here -->

    </layout>

<!-- US layout and variants start here-->

    <layout>
      <configItem>
        <name>us</name>

```

### Load Your Changes

Some distros will pick up the changes and insert them in the keyboard
preferences as soon as I saved the file. If your changes aren't showing up, try
reordering your keyboard layouts in keyboard preferences or deleting & readding
the new one.

#### Reconfigure `xkb-data` (Ubuntu only?)

[This article](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Custom%20keyboard%20layout%20definition)
says this may be running `sudo dpkg-reconfigure xkb-data` may be required. This
is so that Ubuntu reconfigures the changes made to your `/usr/share/X11/xkb`
folder.
